# What is a socket?

You hear talk of "sockets" all the time, and perhaps you are wondering
just what they are exactly. Well, they're this: a way to speak to other
programs using standard Unix [i[File descriptor]] file descriptors.

What?

Ok---you may have heard some Unix hacker state, "Jeez, _everything_ in
Unix is a file!" What that person may have been talking about is the
fact that when Unix programs do any sort of I/O, they do it by reading
or writing to a file descriptor. A file descriptor is simply an integer
associated with an open file. But (and here's the catch), that file can
be a network connection, a FIFO, a pipe, a terminal, a real on-the-disk
file, or just about anything else.  Everything in Unix _is_ a file! So
when you want to communicate with another program over the Internet
you're gonna do it through a file descriptor, you'd better believe it.

"Where do I get this file descriptor for network communication, Mr.
Smarty-Pants?" is probably the last question on your mind right now, but
I'm going to answer it anyway: You make a call to the [i[`socket()`
function]] `socket()` system routine. It returns the [i[Socket
descriptor]] socket descriptor, and you communicate through it using the
specialized [i[`send()` function]] `send()` and [i[`recv()` function]]
`recv()` ([`man send`](#sendman), [`man recv`](#recvman)) socket calls.

"But, hey!" you might be exclaiming right about now. "If it's a file
descriptor, why in the name of Neptune can't I just use the normal
[i[`read()` function]] `read()` and [i[`write()` function]] `write()`
calls to communicate through the socket?"  The short answer is, "You
can!"  The longer answer is, "You can, but [i[`send()` function]]
`send()` and [i[`recv()` function]] `recv()` offer much greater control
over your data transmission."

What next? How about this: there are all kinds of sockets. There are
DARPA Internet addresses (Internet Sockets), path names on a local node
(Unix Sockets), CCITT X.25 addresses (X.25 Sockets that you can safely
ignore), and probably many others depending on which Unix flavor you
run.  This document deals only with the first: Internet Sockets.


## Two Types of Internet Sockets

What's this? There are two types of Internet sockets? Yes. Well, no. I'm
lying. There are more, but I didn't want to scare you.  I'm only going
to talk about two types here. Except for this sentence, where I'm going
to tell you that [i[Raw sockets]] "Raw Sockets" are also very powerful
and you should look them up.

All right, already. What are the two types? One is [i[Stream sockets]]
"Stream Sockets"; the other is [i[Datagram sockets]] "Datagram Sockets",
which may hereafter be referred to as [i[`SOCK_STREAM` macro]]
"`SOCK_STREAM`" and [i[`SOCK_DGRAM` macro]] "`SOCK_DGRAM`",
respectively. Datagram sockets are sometimes called "connectionless
sockets".  (Though they can be [i[`connect()` function]] `connect()`'d
if you really want. See [`connect()`](#connect), below.)

Stream sockets are reliable two-way connected communication streams. If
you output two items into the socket in the order "1, 2", they will
arrive in the order "1, 2" at the opposite end. They will also be
error-free. I'm so certain, in fact, they will be error-free, that I'm
just going to put my fingers in my ears and chant _la la la la_ if
anyone tries to claim otherwise.

What uses stream sockets? Well, you may have heard of the [i[telnet]]
`telnet` or `ssh` applications, yes? They use stream sockets. All the
characters you type need to arrive in the same order you type them,
right? Also, web browsers use the Hypertext Transfer Protocol [i[HTTP
protocol]] (HTTP) which uses stream sockets to get pages. Indeed, if you
telnet to a web site on port 80, and type "`GET / HTTP/1.0`" and hit
RETURN twice, it'll dump the HTML back at you!

> If you don't have `telnet` installed and don't want to install it, or
> your `telnet` is being picky about connecting to clients, the guide
> comes with a `telnet`-like program called [flx[`telnot`|telnot.c]].
> This should work well for all the needs of the guide. (Note that
> telnet is actually a [flrfc[spec'd networking protocol|854]], and
> `telnot` doesn't implement this protocol at all.)

How do stream sockets achieve this high level of data transmission
quality?  They use a protocol called "The Transmission Control
Protocol", otherwise known as [i[TCP]] "TCP" (see [flrfc[RFC 793|793]]
for extremely detailed info on TCP). TCP makes sure your data arrives
sequentially and error-free. You may have heard "TCP" before as the
better half of "TCP/IP" where [i[IP]]  "IP" stands for "Internet
Protocol" (see [flrfc[RFC 791|791]]).  IP deals primarily with Internet
routing and is not generally responsible for data integrity.

[i[Datagram sockets]<]

Cool. What about Datagram sockets? Why are they
called connectionless? What is the deal, here, anyway? Why are they
unreliable?  Well, here are some facts: if you send a datagram, it may
arrive. It may arrive out of order. If it arrives, the data within the
packet will be error-free.

Datagram sockets also use IP for routing, but they don't use TCP; they
use the "User Datagram Protocol", or [i[UDP]] "UDP" (see [flrfc[RFC
768|768]]).

Why are they connectionless? Well, basically, it's because you don't
have to maintain an open connection as you do with stream sockets. You
just build a packet, slap an IP header on it with destination
information, and send it out.  No connection needed. They are generally
used either when a TCP stack is unavailable or when a few dropped
packets here and there don't mean the end of the Universe. Sample
applications: `tftp` (trivial file transfer protocol, a little brother
to FTP), `dhcpcd` (a DHCP client), multiplayer games, streaming audio,
video conferencing, etc.

[i[Datagram sockets]>]

"Wait a minute! `tftp` and `dhcpcd` are used to transfer binary
applications from one host to another! Data can't be lost if you expect
the application to work when it arrives! What kind of dark magic is
this?"

Well, my human friend, `tftp` and similar programs have their own
protocol on top of UDP. For example, the tftp protocol says that for
each packet that gets sent, the recipient has to send back a packet that
says, "I got it!" (an "ACK" packet). If the sender of the original
packet gets no reply in, say, five seconds, he'll re-transmit the packet
until he finally gets an ACK. This acknowledgment procedure is very
important when implementing reliable `SOCK_DGRAM` applications.

For unreliable applications like games, audio, or video, you just ignore
the dropped packets, or perhaps try to cleverly compensate for them.
(Quake players will know the manifestation of this effect by the technical
term: _accursed lag_.  The word "accursed", in this case, represents any
extremely profane utterance.)

Why would you use an unreliable underlying protocol? Two reasons: speed
and speed. It's way faster to fire-and-forget than it is to keep track
of what has arrived safely and make sure it's in order and all that. If
you're sending chat messages, TCP is great; if you're sending 40
positional updates per second of the players in the world, maybe it
doesn't matter so much if one or two get dropped, and UDP is a good
choice.


## Low level Nonsense and Network Theory {#lowlevel}

Since I just mentioned layering of protocols, it's time to talk about
how networks really work, and to show some examples of how
[i[`SOCK_DGRAM` macro]] `SOCK_DGRAM` packets are built.  Practically,
you can probably skip this section. It's good background, however.

![Data Encapsulation.](dataencap.pdf "[Encapsulated Protocols Diagram]")

Hey, kids, it's time to learn about [i[Data encapsulation]] _Data
Encapsulation_! This is very very important. It's so important that you
might just learn about it if you take the networks course here at Chico
State `;-)`.  Basically, it says this: a packet is born, the packet is
wrapped ("encapsulated") in a [i[Data enacapsulation-->header]] header
(and rarely a [i[Data encapsulation-->footer]] footer) by the first
protocol (say, the [i[TFTP]] TFTP protocol), then the whole thing (TFTP
header included) is encapsulated again by the next protocol (say,
[i[UDP]] UDP), then again by the next [i[IP]] (IP), then again by the
final protocol on the hardware (physical) layer (say, [i[Ethernet]]
Ethernet).

When another computer receives the packet, the hardware strips the
Ethernet header, the kernel strips the IP and UDP headers, the TFTP
program strips the TFTP header, and it finally has the data.

Now I can finally talk about the infamous [i[Layered network model]]
[i[ISO/OSI]] _Layered Network Model_ (aka "ISO/OSI"). This Network Model
describes a system of network functionality that has many advantages
over other models. For instance, you can write sockets programs that are
exactly the same without caring how the data is physically transmitted
(serial, thin Ethernet, AUI, whatever) because programs on lower levels
deal with it for you. The actual network hardware and topology is
transparent to the socket programmer.

Without any further ado, I'll present the layers of the full-blown
model.  Remember this for network class exams:

* Application
* Presentation
* Session
* Transport
* Network
* Data Link
* Physical

The Physical Layer is the hardware (serial, Ethernet, etc.). The
Application Layer is just about as far from the physical layer as you
can imagine---it's the place where users interact with the network.

Now, this model is so general you could probably use it as an automobile
repair guide if you really wanted to. A layered model more consistent
with Unix might be:

* Application Layer (_telnet, ftp, etc._)
* Host-to-Host Transport Layer (_TCP, UDP_)
* Internet Layer (_IP and routing_)
* Network Access Layer (_Ethernet, wi-fi, or whatever_)

At this point in time, you can probably see how these layers correspond
to the encapsulation of the original data.

See how much work there is in building a simple packet? Jeez! And you
have to type in the packet headers yourself using "`cat`"! Just kidding.
All you have to do for stream sockets is [i[`send()` function]] `send()`
the data out. All you have to do for datagram sockets is encapsulate the
packet in the method of your choosing and [i[`sendto()` function]]
`sendto()` it out. The kernel builds the Transport Layer and Internet
Layer on for you and the hardware does the Network Access Layer. Ah,
modern technology.

So ends our brief foray into network theory. Oh yes, I forgot to tell
you everything I wanted to say about routing: nothing! That's right, I'm
not going to talk about it at all. The router strips the packet to the
IP header, consults its routing table, [i[Blah blah blah]] _blah blah
blah_. Check out the [flrfc[IP RFC|791]] if you really really care. If
you never learn about it, well, you'll live.
